# circRNA-project

In this project I used RNA-seq results from human postmortem brains of neuro-typical controls and ASD individuals to further investigate the connection between circRNA expression and ASD.
My main question was: Is there a difference in circRNA expression between ASD brains compared to controls? 

First, to get an indication whether there are any differences between the circRNA levels of expression in the ASD compared to control brains, I summed all the reads in every sample in each dataset. By dividing the sum of circRNA and the sum of linear RNA, I calculated a circular to liner RNA ratio for each brain sample. To see whether there is a significant difference between ASD and controls I used t-test. I also compared the differences of circRNA expression across different brain regions (cortex and vermis) and across ASD related symptoms such as seizures and chromosome 15q duplication by using anova tests. Next, I conducted two differential expression analysis of linear RNA and of circRNA in the cortex between ASD and controls samples using the edgeR package. Differential expression analysis using edgeR requires a calculation of normalization factors to every RNA-seq library and to multiply the reads in the samples by these factors to avoid biased results. This calculation works under the assumption that most of the genes are not expected to be changed across the different conditions. In our case, since we were suspecting that there is a global shifting in the expression rates of many circRNAs, I could not use this calculation. For this reason, the normalization of the library was conducted using the normalization factors that were calculated for the linear RNA since they were sequenced simultaneously, and therefore probably had the same bias as the circular reads, but most of them were not expected to change in ASD samples compared to controls. I filtered out of the analysis the circRNAs that didn’t have at least one read in third of the samples since genes with low number of counts across libraries provide little evidence for differential expression. 
I found a list of 19 circRNAs that were validated in before by using RNase R enzyme and appeared in my analysis. After filtering out of the dataset I was using only the circRNAs that were previously validated; I compared the distribution log fold change from the differential expression results of the previously validates circRNAs and the distribution of all the circRNAs that were detected. In addition, I conducted a permutation test with 1000 repetitions to see whether they had a similar pattern of change in expression as the other circRNAs that weren’t validated before. 
Next, I used a dataset of RNA-editing information that included some of the same brain samples that were used in the creation of the circRNA dataset I was working with. I filtered only the common samples from both datasets and calculated the mean of RNA-editing levels for each sample. Next, I conducted a correlation test in every brain region between the circular to linear RNA ratio and the mean of the RNA-editing levels in each sample.    

